Add blogpost about new versioning scheme (#172)
mumble-voip/mumble-www: hugo/content/blog/2021-12-07-new-versioning-scheme/index.md

---
title: New versioning scheme
author: Robert Adam
date: 2021-12-07
categories:
  - News
---

> Mumble traditionally used a versioning scheme of the form major.minor.patch where the patch version number was incremented for every bug-fix release

Reviewer: suggestion: italic

```suggestion
Mumble traditionally used a versioning scheme of the form *major.minor.patch* where the patch version number was incremented for every bug-fix release

```

(e.g. 1.2.0, 1.3.0, etc.). This will no longer be the case.

<!--more-->

## Background

Mumble was always using the [semantic versioning scheme](https://semver.org/) which generally makes it really easy to know what to expect when
switching from one version to another. While this is working great, using only the three common version numbers (major.minor.patch) poses a problem
when considering snapshot builds. A snapshot build is essentially a beta-release for an upcoming release. Thus it has to use the same version numbers
as that upcoming release. Thus, in order to get a unique versioning scheme, we had to make use of the fourth version number, that semantic versioning
allows for. We called this the _build number_. This build number was just a number that was incremented with every build of the Mumble binaries that
we performed. Thus a version could now look like this: 1.4.0.62 and the stable release would then simply use whatever build number was next in the
queue.

## The problem

In theory that worked great and solved the issue at hand: we now had a unique version for every release (be that a stable or a snapshot release).

> However, as it turns out Windows hasn't arrived in the 21st century yet: it restricts programs to use a three-component versioning scheme. While it is

Reviewer: Is this a Windows thing? A MSI installer thing?

Reviewer: I don't like the aggressive wording. I though it could be worded better. Even with voicing frustration or shortcomings if we want to do so explicitly.

Author: I think we don't even know where exactly the issue is rooted.

Reviewer 2: Indeed, for all we know it could be an issue in WiX rather than the MSI subsystem.

> possible to set a fourth component, without causing any issues (it is even displayed when checking the program's version), it is ignored for all

Reviewer: Is this about file properties? The installed apps list? Or both?

Author: I know it is displayed in the installed app list. Whether this also applies to file properties, I don't know

relevant actions such as upgrading to a newer version. However, it seems it wasn't ignored entirely as using a four-component versioning scheme caused

> Windows to install a second (or third, or ...) version of Mumble alongside the already installed version if one was to attempt to upgrade between

Reviewer: suggestion: replace *(or x, or...)* with encapsulating wording

```suggestion
Windows to install an additional version of Mumble alongside the already installed version if one was to attempt to upgrade between

```

Mumble versions that only differed in the build number.

## The solution

After having researched quite a bit, we came to the conclusion that it seems to be impossible to get Windows to properly respect the build number in

> our version specifier (old dogs don't learn new tricks), so it was clear that we had to find a different solution to this. We evaluated a few

Reviewer: I would remove the proverb.

The text stands well on it's own. I'm not really familiar with it either.

```suggestion
our version specifier, so it was clear that we had to find a different solution to this. We evaluated a few

```

Author: You mean the `old dogs don't learn new tricks` part? That's a quite common saying in English and is typically used when referring to something old that won't change its ways (in that regard) anymore.

> different possibilities but eventually settled on using the patch version number as a replacement for the build number (which will be dropped). Thus,

Reviewer: I think this is a bit confusing; I had to second-take because parentheses may grammatically refer to the patch version here.

```suggestion
different possibilities but eventually settled on using the patch version number as a replacement for the build number. The build number will be dropped. Thus,

```

we are back at a 3-component version scheme but now the third component is the build number instead of the patch level (major.minor.build).

This appears to be a purely semantical difference and for the most part, it is. The only notable difference is that now the third component of the
version will (usually) no longer start at zero and then increment one by one while iterating through the different versions of a stable release
series. Instead, the build number will be increased with every build we create and thus the build number of the released stable versions will be
somewhat arbitrary. Therefore, it could be that the first release of the 1.4 series will be e.g. 1.4.53 while the first bug-fix release will then
become 1.4.281.

This makes it impossible to tell (by just looking at the versions themselves) how many releases lay between two given version numbers. However, in
most scenarios this is probably not what is interesting anyway. Usually one is only interested in which version is newer and that is still immediately
obvious by looking at the version numbers.

## Summary

> Versions remain in a three component format but the third component will now be the build number instead of the patch level. The latter is no longer

Reviewer: for clarity
```suggestion
Versions remain in a three component format but the third component will now be the build number instead of the patch level. The patch number is no longer

```

Author: Nah, that's repetitive. `latter` should be unambiguous in this context

Reviewer: I read it wrong first. I think because when saying "build number instead of patch level", build number is the significant information. The sentence talks about the three components and what the third component is. So I read "the latter" being about the third component, the build number.

---
title: New versioning scheme
author: Robert Adam
date: 2021-12-07
categories:
  - News
---
Mumble traditionally used a versioning scheme of the form _major.minor.patch_ where the patch version number was incremented for every bug-fix release
of a stable release series (e.g. 1.3.0 -> 1.3.1). Most notably though, the patch version was always starting at zero for a new stable release series
(e.g. 1.2.0, 1.3.0, etc.). This will no longer be the case.

<!--more-->

## Background

> Mumble was always using the [semantic versioning scheme](https://semver.org/) which generally makes it really easy to know what to expect when

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Mumble has always been using the [semantic versioning scheme](https://semver.org/) which generally makes it really easy to know what to expect when

```

Reviewer 2: @Krzmbrzl What do you think about my suggestion? "was" is ambiguous, as it may imply that we're not using semantic versioning anymore (which is not the case).

Author: sounds good to me, but the blog post has been released already. Feel free to make the change directly on master though :+1:
